Stanislov Grof began his career in psychotherapy
at the end of the Nazi occupation of Czechoslavakia.
Do not adjust your computer screen.
Yes, he looks like a much younger man.
A testament to living his truth.
In his work, exploring altered states of consciousness,
he came to see how ludicrous the traditional
medical understanding of these non-ordinary
states of consciousness were.
For example, in today's lexicon of pathology
Buddha would be labeled schizophrenic
or at least borderline
and St. John of the Cross a hereditary degenerative.
His journey into expanded awareness
began as a medical student volunteering
for a new drug called LSD.
(peaceful music)
Let's start, not at the beginning,
but at your beginning,
which is your background was in psychoanalysis,
Freudian psychoanalysis.
What were you finding that was lacking
that threw you onto this incredible path?
I went to medicine with the expressed goal
to become a psychoanalyst.
My original plan was really to work in animated movies.
When I was finishing what in the states
would be high school,
I had an interview and I was supposed to start working
in the film studios in Prague.
Just at that time a friend of mine came
and handed me a book
which was Freud's Introductory Lectures
to Psychoanalysis.
I didn't know very much about Freud.
You have to imagine this was after the six years
of the Nazi occupation where everything
that was related to psychoanalysis was burned.
This was in Czechoslavakia.
Yeah. All these books were burned in the streets.
Three years after the war,
the libraries were trying to get the books back.
Then the communists came and Freud was again indexed.
You had to be a Marxist writing a critique of Freud
to get access to Freudian books.
All I knew about Freud
was what they told us in classes of Philosophy,
which was that he was a pansexualist.
He was trying to explain everything
from symbolism of dreams
through symptoms of neurosis
to religion and art from repressed sexuality.
I was kind of marginally interested to start with
and I started reading the book.
I got myself into this really kind of feverish state.
I got so excited by Freud's logic,
I couldn't go to sleep.
I read through the night and within two days
I decided I would let the animated movies go
and go to study medicine to become a psychoanalyst.
Where did you start running
into your first roadblocks
once you gained this knowledge and practice?
Once you got through school and you started practicing,
where did you start seeing your first limitations
or roadblocks?
The problem initially for me was the conflict
between the theory of psychoanalysis
which seemed to explain everything.
My analyst used to say,
"There's nothing in the psyche
"that psychoanalysis cannot explain.
"There are only things that it has not explained yet,
"because there were not the right persons
"giving the free associations."
I had difficulties understanding how a system
that seems to be able to explain everything
cannot offer more effective therapeutic techniques.
I realized there were very narrow
sort of criteria for indications.
You had to meet very special criteria
to be considered a good candidate.
Even if you were considered a good candidate,
you had to commit yourself an enormous amount of time.
My analysis was three times a week, seven years.
Has to be a faster way.
I had great difficulties because I had to study medicine
to become a Freudian analyst.
You have to have a medical background in Europe.
If you study medicine,
you find out that if you really understand a problem
then you should be able to do something
pretty dramatic about it or if you cannot
you can understand your failures.
Like with cancer or with AIDS,
we have a pretty good idea as to where the problem is,
what we have to change for us.
You know, why we are ineffective.
Whereas here suddenly there was like a full understanding
of a problem and you can do so little
over such a long period of time.
It just didn't make any sense to me.
Hopscotching forward just a little bit,
and not that much forward.
Enter the subject of
backing into in essence psychedelic drugs
and using this for clinical research among medical faculty.
Can you explain how psychedelic drugs
entered this whole arena in your life?
To me, this was initially completely unrelated
to my interest in psychoanalysis.
I was working at the
Psychiatry Department of the School of Medicine
in Prague.
We were just finishing a large study of Mellaril,
one of the early tranquilizers.
That came from Saunders Pharmaceutical Companies.
They were sending us samples of various substances
that they produced.
As part of this, they sent us a sample,
big sample of LSD,
asking us would we like to work with it
and let them know if there was any legitimate use for it.
They suggested in their letter two uses.
One was maybe this substance could be used
as a model psychosis.
There seemed to be some similarities
between the experiences of people on LSD
and the symptoms of naturally occurring psychosis.
This would be a model.
You could give it to so-called normal people,
do all kinds of testing before, during and after,
and get some insight as to what's happening
biologically, biochemically, physiologically
in the body of people at the time when they have these
very unusual experiences.
This was their idea
how it might be properly utilized.
Yes.
What actually ended up happening with it
and how did this affect your life?
There was a second little note which was there
which really became a critical element in my life.
Where they said maybe this could be used
as a kind of unconventional training tool.
Psychiatrists, psychologists, nurses, students
could spend a few hours in the world of their patients.
In other words,
if the practitioners ...
For learning purposes.
In the medical community
took the LSD and started experiencing it,
they would be able to relate
to their patients better, right?
Yes. Understand them better.
Be able to treat them more effectively.
Did you end up being
one of the people that ...
Yes. I became one of the early volunteers
and I had an experience that changed my life,
professionally as well as personally.
What happened?
This was an actual situation where I had to agree,
besides doing the LSD, to have the EEG taken
before, during and after,
and also do something that was called
driving the brainwaves.
Which was basically, in my case,
exposure to powerful stroboscopic light.
When the light came on at the time
and I was peaking on LSD,
I saw this light of incredible intensity.
I lost the connection with my body.
I lost the connection with Prague,
with the planet.
I had a sense that my consciousness
just became all there was.
Powerful, powerful cosmic mystical experience.
I came down from that experience
with a sense that
that's by far the most interesting thing
that you can do when you're a psychiatrist.
For about 50 years since that time,
I have really professionally done very little,
except things that in one way or another
were related to these states.
Became my passion.
In that 50 years,
your discovery ...
Can you explain what your discovery has been
in terms of the understanding of
and also the value of
having had these mystical experiences.
Whether they're induced by a psychedelic drug
or whether they're induced by a shamanistic practice
or meditation.
What is this that we're now bumping up against
at this point in our human evolution?
We have, in traditional psychiatry, psychology,
we have the idea that these experiences are
what's called altered states of consciousness.
Which means inauthentic,
sort of distorted
due to some kind of toxic influences.
These are experiences produced by the brain
under certain abnormal circumstances,
and they have no relevance.
They are not healing.
They are not transformative.
They are not evolutionary.
They're just abnormalities.
Abnormalities.
Maybe you're even labeled psychotic
if you have these and speak of them.
Yeah, definitely.
Any non-ordinary state with the exception of a dream,
a dream which is not,
I would have to say,
which is not associated with anxiety
and it doesn't repeat too frequently.
Because then, even dream is seen as pathological.
But you can have the ordinary variety
without getting a diagnosis.
But any other non-ordinary state of consciousness
would be seen as pathological.
It's a diagnosis then.
There is no distinction between
a mystical or spiritual experience
on the one hand,
and a psychotic experience.
Meaning symptom of mental disease,
serious mental disease.
After your experience,
this must have caused you some trouble
to realize that that is the commonly held
notion about all experiences.
They're all in the same basket.
Yes. There was no ...
Being a nutcase, so to speak.
Yeah. Working with these experiences
for a number of years,
it became absolutely obvious to me that these are,
if anything those are super normal experiences
that are not altered states.
They are not distortions
of what the world is like
or what we are like,
but that they kind of show certain
additional dimensions of us
as human beings
and additional dimensions of reality
which are not available
in the ordinary state of consciousness.
They are complimentary.
Mystics, when they have a mystical experience,
they don't have the sense
that they experienced some kind of a distortion
of how things are.
On the contrary,
they experience a sense that now they really
have some profound understanding
of what existence is about.
They get a piece which they were missing
up to that point.
The every day and the non-ordinary
of what I call holotropic,
which is a certain important subcategory
of non-ordinary experiences,
those are complimentary.
Each of them gives you a perspective
on a different sector
or aspect of reality.
Very simply,
in your mind now,
before we go to ways of being able to help
facilitate these other states of consciousness.
Talk therapy.
What's it good for really?
When you get down to it,
what's talk therapy do?
Talk therapy,
the way I see it now,
is still good, for example,
when you work with couples
and you need somebody who's a little more objective,
who sort of gives each of those partners feedback
as to the different loops that people get caught in
or family therapy
where you're dealing with the whole system.
Almost like a mediator in part.
Even in that case,
I would today use some kind of deep experiential work
individually with the partners.
Then you can use verbal therapy
when you're working specifically
on the distortion of the interaction between them.
The idea
of working through,
let's say some serious problems,
like the idea that you could work through asthma,
just talking about it is just not very realistic.
Let's use asthma then.
As an example of how,
in your mind now through your experience
and what you've developed,
how would you work through
something like asthma.
How many layers
might be underneath that condition?
What we do.
We cannot use psychedelics now.
I don't have the legal framework,
but we work with holotropic breath work.
Tell me a little bit about the breath.
You work basically in such a way
that you are in a reclining position
on a mattress with
eye shades or with your eyes closed.
There is a sudden kind of introduction
which involves relaxation of the body,
bringing yourself into the present moment.
Then at a certain point,
you start breathing a little faster,
deeper than usual,
tying the inhalation and the exhalation
into a kind of circle of breath.
Then we start playing powerful music,
usually music that's drawn from
some of the ethnic traditions.
From cultures that
are using music to change consciousness.
Kind of training the brain?
Yeah. Let's say the different
African cultures
or some other non-Western cultures
developed drumming rhythms
that can very powerfully change the brain functioning
and use a trans state.
Or we play Tibetan ritual music
or Sufi music,
also some good contemporary music,
particularly one that's inspired by
these spiritual or ethnic
traditions.
Before you continue this,
just to interject something.
The breath has always been
considered a pathway into enlightenment
in many ancient cultures hasn't it?
In many ancient cultures,
you see breath somehow touches on many different levels.
It's the physical level.
It's the air that you breathe.
A very important physiological function.
You couldn't live without breathing.
But it's also connecting then you with the psyche
and through the psyche to the spirit.
In many, many cultures
linguistically, there is a deep connection
between breath and spirit.
Like if you have terms like
Pluma, in the Gnostic tradition,
means breath
but also the cosmic essence
or Prana in the Indian culture
or Ki in the Japanese culture,
Chi in the Chinese culture,
Ruach in the Hebrew tradition.
Here we are a culture
that barely even breathes
in the United States.
True.
How do you do ...
How does this work then as you continue
sharing with us about the breath work?
Your brain has been entrained to some of the
more mystical kinds of music and sound.
Then what occurs?
You go into what I call a holotropic state,
which is a certain important
subgroup of what we call non-ordinary state.
The things that happen to Shamans
as part of the initiatory crisis
or that they induce in their clients
when they are healing them.
Things that happen in rites of passage
of various native cultures.
Things that were happening to
the initiates in the ancient mysteries.
The states that are experienced by Yogi's,
by Buddhists,
by Dalit's,
by Sufi's,
by Christian mystics,
by the Cabalist's,
Hasidic Jews and so on.
It's a non-ordinary ...
All of them, by the way,
would have been deemed psychotic
had they gone to ...
Oh, sure.
It's not would have been.
We have, in modern psychiatric literature actually,
a lot of books and articles
discussing what would be the best diagnosis.
Ramakrishna was
a schizophrenic.
St. John of the Cross was hereditary degenerative.
Was Buddhists delusional or
Buddha delusional?
Sure. He had hallucinations from it,
so he would be schizophrenic
or if he happened to function,
he would be called borderline.
There is even a paper by Franz Alexander,
who is one of the Founders of
psychosomatic medicine,
where meditation is pathologized.
It's a paper called, "Buddhist training
is artificial catatonia.
Unbelievable approach.
It pathologizes the whole,
not only ritual and spiritual history of humanity
where great religions were started by schizophrenics,
but also the cultural history
because religion played an enormous role
in human history.
The idea how experiences of schizophrenics
caused by some kind of unknown brain pathology
could have ultimately led to building of
cathedrals, gothic cathedrals
or Muslim Mosque's
or Hindu temples.
That they would inspire great composers,
great artists,
A lot of people relatively normal
would give up their personal life
and pursue the ideas of Buddha or ...
Basically, we don't want
to take a pill for it.
That's for sure.
How do we go deeper into it
to help work our way through some of our
living, breathing, every day issues?
As I mentioned,
the breathing and the music
induces this non-ordinary state.
Once you are in it,
those states function as a kind of inner radar
that things that are in your unconscious
that have a sufficient emotional charge
and they're also close enough to the surface
that they are available
for us to synch,
they start surfacing.
The content of the unconscious
starts surfacing into your consciousness
and becomes your experience.
The problems, the symptoms,
get consumed.
They are transformed into a
stream of experiences.
This might look nothing like anything
you would have ever pegged to be
at the root of a problem.
It's usually very different
from what you would think about intellectually
or what a particular school of therapy
would tell you
that you would choose for your therapy.
(peaceful music)
A global search
for the truth behind consciousness
is becoming apparent everywhere I go.
In another of our interviews,
the respected Science Journalist,
Graham Hancock,
shares his amazing journey into the
Brazilian Shamonic world
where he partakes of Ayahuasca
Until next time,
thanks for watching.
(peaceful music)